1.  What is a database schema?
    Think of a schema as the blueprint of your database — like a map showing what tables exist, what columns each table has, and how tables relate to each other.
    Why it matters: Without a schema, your database is just random data. With it, everyone (developers, admins) understands the structure clearly.
    Interview tip
    Analogy: Schema is like a house blueprint — it defines the rooms (tables), what goes in them (columns), and how they connect (relationships).

2.  Primary key vs Foreign key?
    Primary Key : Uniquely identifies each row in a table. No duplicates, no NULLs. One per table.
    Foreign Key : A column that points to the primary key of another table. Creates a link (relationship) between two tables.
    Example: In an Orders table, user_id is a foreign key referencing the id (primary key) in the Users table.

3.  What are CRUD operations?
    Create   INSERT INTO table VALUES (...)
    Read     SELECT * FROM table WHERE ...
    Update   UPDATE table SET col=val WHERE ...
    Delete   DELETE FROM table WHERE ...

4.  Types of JOINs — explained simply
    INNER JOIN  Only rows that match in BOTH tables
    LEFT JOIN   All rows from left table + matched from right (NULLs for no match)
    RIGHT JOIN  All rows from right table + matched from left (NULLs for no match)
    FULL JOIN   All rows from both tables (NULLs wherever no match)

5.  What are ACID properties?
    ACID ensures your database transactions are reliable and safe.

    Atomicity     All or nothing — if one step fails, whole transaction rolls back
    Consistency   Database always goes from one valid state to another
    Isolation     Two transactions don't interfere with each other
    Durability    Once committed, data is saved even if system crashes
    Real example: Bank transfer — debit one account AND credit another. If credit fails, debit must also be reversed (Atomicity).

6.  OLTP vs OLAP — what's the difference?
    OLTP   Day-to-day transactions (insert/update/delete). Fast, short operations. Example: Amazon orders
    OLAP   Analysis & reporting on large data. Slow, complex queries. Example: Sales dashboards, data warehouses

7.  Relational (SQL) vs NoSQL — key differences
    Relational (SQL) :  Tables with fixed schema, ACID compliant, great for structured data. e.g. MySQL, PostgreSQL
    NoSQL            :  Flexible schema, handles unstructured data, scales horizontally. e.g. MongoDB, Redis, Cassandra

8.  What is data normalization?
    Normalization = organizing your database to avoid repeating data and keep it consistent.

    1NF  Each cell has one value only (no lists in a cell)
    2NF  Every column depends on the whole primary key
    3NF  Every column depends only on the primary key (no indirect dependencies)

9.  Common SQL aggregate functions
    SUM() — total of a column
    AVG() — average value
    COUNT() — number of rows
    MIN() — smallest value
    MAX() — largest value
    Used with GROUP BY to aggregate data per group.

